Christmas 1979. Soviet armor pours
across the Afghan border towards Kabell
as helicopters secure the mountain
passes through the Hindu Kush mountains.
In Moscow, the pilot bureau has decided
to save Afghanistan's communist
government from collapse. Afghan rebels
have taken up arms against the unpopular
regime and control most of the
countryside. But the Red Army leadership
doubts it can pacify the country. So why
did the Soviet Union invade Afghanistan?
Afghanistan in the 1970s is a country
with a long history as a crossroads of
empire and of internal instability.
After World War II, there's a period of
relative stability under King Zahir Sha,
whose government introduces moderate
reforms to avoid angering conservatives.
He also suppresses those demanding too
much change, including Afghan communists
who already have contact with the Soviet
KGB. In 1964, King Zahir introduces a
more liberal constitution that allows
political parties. At the same time,
Kabell universities become a hotbed of
political activity from moderates to
monarchists to Islamists and communists.
The Communists create the People's
Democratic Party of Afghanistan or PDPA.
Among their founding members are Hafi
Amin, Babra Carmal and Nor Muhammad
Taraki, all of whom work with the KGB.
They have strong admiration for the
Soviet transformation of its central
Asian republics. They want radical
change, but project a more moderate line
in public and still only attract support
from a few urban elites and Soviet
trained army officers. The few
communists there were also split along
ethnic and ideological lines in 1967
with a more hardline group under Taraki
and a more moderate group under Karma.
While some Afghans look to socialism,
others look to political Islam, not
necessarily radical Islam either.
Educated Islamist Afghans debate what a
modern Islamic society should be like.
The king even encourages Islamic
activities to contain Marxist influence.
The most important Islamic group is also
founded at a university, Jamiat Islami,
which preaches a conservative form of
Islam inspired by Egypt's Muslim
Brotherhood.
Afghanistan's relations with the wider
world are also in flux. After 1945, in
1960, Soviet equipped Afghan forces
clash with neighboring Pakistan over the
status of crossber territory inhabited
by Afghanistan's biggest ethnic group,
the Pashtunes.
Pakistan wants a stable and neutral
Afghanistan so it can focus on its
conflict with India. Kabell also looks
abroad for humanitarian aid from both
sides of the cold war. Officially
non-aligned, Afghanistan leans heavily
on Soviet aid, including for
infrastructure, but engineers and other
advisers from the US, West Germany, and
elsewhere also work in the country.
American scholar Lewis DRI writes of a
privileged American Soviet role in
Afghanistan.
In towns outside Kabell, where Russians
had major projects, their technicians
lived as well as, if not better than the
Americans. They had spacious hotel and
apartment accommodations, lavish
commisseries, private theaters,
Olympicized swimming pools. Many Soviet
technicians genuinely felt disturbed
when ordered home after a tour of duty.
Like their American counterparts, they'd
never had it so good.
The modernization program and
international aid help create a small
urban middle class in Afghan cities. The
countryside accepts new infrastructure
but resists social changes that make
some headway in cities like women's
education and rights. By the 1960s,
Afghanistan's modernization is falling
behind other developing states, and King
Zahir is still reluctant to further
democratize the country, partly due to
his fear of communism.
In 1973, Muhammad Dawoud Khan takes
power in an armybacked coup. At first,
he works with the moderate communists,
but soon excludes them and rules as a
strong man, silencing any opposition and
purging the civil service and officer
corps. Afghan Islamists oppose Dawood's
progressive policies and harsh rule, and
Pakistan's intelligence service, the
ISI, provides them with training and
equipment for armed resistance. After an
ISI supported Islamist attack against
Afghan government buildings in 1975,
Dawoud imprisons, executes or forces
them into exile, many Islamists flee to
Pakistan where President Zulfikar Ali
Bhau's government allows them to settle
in the hopes of creating a thorn in
Kabell's side. Former engineering
student Muhammad Ishach remembers the
escape to Pakistan.
We took part in an operation in the
Ponir Valley in 1975 and we were
defeated. Then we had to retreat into
the mountains and it was very dark. We
had to stay at the top of the mountain.
We did not have enough clothes because
we were coming from a warm area and I
think I got sick. We could not get warm
but we could not move because of the
enemy.
The Islamists are split into several
groups based on ideological
disagreements, but they claim legitimacy
among hundreds of thousands of Afghans
who also flee into Pakistan in the
following years. Meanwhile, Dawood
reaches out to many states for
development and military aid and asks
the US for intel on Soviet intentions
even as he strikes an economic deal with
Moscow and starts to improve relations
with Pakistan and Iran. Soviet leader
Lean Benev wants to maintain decades of
Soviet investment and influence in
Afghanistan and advises Dawoud during a
Moscow meeting in April 1977.
Some NATO personnel in northern
Afghanistan who are spies and are a
security risk to the USSR should be
removed,
but Dawood brushes him off. Afghanistan
is a free and independent country and we
will not tolerate anyone telling us who
to allow and who not to allow to work
for us.
In April 1978, demonstrations break out
at the funeral of a prominent Afghan
communist. In response, Dawood arrests
PDPA leaders. Now though, the Afghan
communists are better organized, have
united the rival factions, and enjoy KGB
support. They've infiltrated some state
institutions, including the army. Daud's
regime has lost support among the middle
classes, and communist army officers
rally troops loyal to the PDPA. Tanks
roll into Kabell while jet fighters
scream overhead, and PDPA troops kill
Dawood and more than a thousand of his
followers in fierce fighting.
A 15-year-old Afghan remembers the
announcement of the SA revolution on
April 27th, 1978.
We could hear Radio Afghanistan playing
revolutionary songs and the repeated
statement, "The revolution of seventh
sour has been victorious and the armed
forces of the country are in control. We
congratulate the people of Afghanistan."
The teachers told us to clap and then go
into class. After only a few hours, we
went home. My father asked why I'd come
home early, and I explained it all to
him. "God bless us," he said. The future
is not good.
The coup comes as a surprise to both the
Soviets and the Americans, and each
thinks the other is behind it. But the
Afghan communists have seized power on
their own. And under a revolutionary
council led by Taraki and Amin, they
implement a radical program, land
reform, including forced expropriations
and equal rights for women. They also
suppress any opposition with mass
executions, torture, and imprisonments.
Publicly, Taraki proclaims that the new
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan will
remain part of the non-aligned movement.
>> Our relationship,
you all should be attentively here. Our
relationship with all the countries
including Soviet Union and all our
neighbors and throughout the world will
be based depend on the amount of their
support to our revolutionary government.
But Pakistan is skeptical about the coup
as it fears another hostile neighbor
along with India and the USSR. The Shaw,
Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the US are
concerned as well. And all three
countries support Pakistan-based
training of various Afghan Islamic
groups loosely referred to as mujahaden
or those fighting for God. The Soviet
Union, on the other hand, cautiously
welcomes a communist Afghanistan, and
the two states soon agree to more Soviet
advisers and $250 million in military
aid. But Taraki and Namin want more and
the Soviets are concerned about the
PDPA's actions. The party strains under
infighting as the radical faction purges
the ranks and exiles moderates like
Carmal. It also struggles with a deeply
religious population and traditional
social structures. PDPA thinkers believe
clergy and tribal leaders are feudalists
holding back progress, but the Soviets
advised them to carefully divide and
conquer their class enemies. Taraki
though maintains a hard line.
These agents of colonialism who hatch
conspiracy under the mask of religion
and faith, they have been plotting for
many years against progressive movements
in different countries. They should be
uprooted like a cancer tumor from the
body of a patient.
The PDPA launches an allout offensive
arresting or killing mullas and their
families. The population turns even more
against the communists and the Islamists
position themselves as savers of Islam
and the Afghan people. Local uprisings
lead to mujahedin control in much of the
north and east. The PDPA responds with
more violence carried out by the secret
police, the KGB supported intel agency
and Sarandoi paramilitaries. All the
while the internal split between Taraki
and his ambitious protege Amin deepens.
The PDPA's grip further weakens in 1979.
In February, unknown militants kidnap US
ambassador Adolf Dubs and hold him in
central Kabell. Then Afghan government
forces with KGB involvement botch an
attempted rescue. Dubs is killed and the
US stops aid programs. In March, a
week-long uprising begins in Hat. An
entire army division mutinies after
being ordered to quell protests. Kabell
sends in more troops. Protesters then
kill those suspected of connections to
the PDPA and lynch Soviet civilian
advisers and their families. The
government puts down the uprising at a
cost of between 3,000 and 25,000 dead.
Another revolt in Kunar Province ends
with 640 deaths in Kerala village
witnessed by 16-year-old Muhammad Ashok.
My father told me to get up and run and
I ran to the mosque. Behind me, I heard
the sound of gunfire. From the mosque, I
saw soldiers take more men to another
field and shoot them.
A worried Taraki asks Moscow to
intervene to shore up the Afghan
government.
Almost nobody does support the
government. In Kabul, we have no
workers, only craftsmen. If Harat falls,
the revolution is doomed. Uprisings have
emerged throughout the entire country
and the army is too small to be able to
pacify the insurgents everywhere.
The pallet bureau though is shocked at
Cabell's brutal reaction to the Herat
uprising.
We gave them everything and what had
come of it? Nothing of any value. After
all, it was they who executed innocent
people for no reason and told us that we
also executed people in Lenin's time.
You see what kind of Marxists we found?
Moscow begins to consider military
intervention to keep Afghanistan within
its sphere of influence. But not all
agree. Head of the KGB, Yuri Andropov,
is among the skeptics. He worries that
Afghanistan is too underdeveloped to
solve its problems with socialism and
only through force could the USSR
prevent a revolution there, a risk he
advises against. After the Herat
uprising, Amin becomes prime minister,
and although he and Taraki are still at
odds, both request more Soviet aid.
Moscow somewhat reluctantly agrees to
send equipment, including T62 tanks and
MI24A helicopters and more military
advisers, but they refuse to send
troops. Even so, the Mujahedin have
already noticed the limited Soviet
presence. The Russians have taken part
in the in the Afghan war now and there
have been in penir in Pakia and also in
Kunar areas some of the Russians
advisers have been killed.
The Soviets want Amin out since they
hold him responsible for the massacres
and policy failures and are suspicious
because he previously studied in the US.
They inform Taraki in September 1979,
after which he tries to capture and
probably kill Amin, but Amin escapes and
has Taraki murdered with a pillow and
takes over. The insurgency gains
momentum quickly. 40% of the Afghan army
deserts, leaving it with just 60,000
men, and about 40,000 Afghan men join
the Mujahedin. The insurgents control
four provinces and the countryside and a
dozen others. Amin reaches out to the US
and UK and says he wants to deepen ties,
though both countries are suspicious of
his motives. This move though inflames
Soviet worries. The KGB even suspects
incorrectly that he might be a CIA
agent. The poll bureau sends more
officers to train Afghan troops, an
additional airborne battalion to Bagram
airfield, and some troops to Cabo
officially for protection. By early
December, Andropov leans towards
intervention.
A military operation would allow us to
decide the question of defending the
gains of the April revolution,
establishing Leninist principles in the
party and state leadership of
Afghanistan, and securing our positions
in this country.
On December 12th, 1979, the Pilot Bureau
secretly decides on regime change. Amin
will be toppled and replaced with
moderate Afghan communist Babra Carmal.
To help the new Afghan government, they
will also carry out a limited military
deployment against Islamists and
possible Iranian or Pakistani
intervention. At the decisive meeting,
Soviet chief of the general staff
Nikolai Garov warns against it.
We will alienate the entire Muslim East
and suffer political damage globally.
Andropov though interrupts him. Focus on
military matters. Leave political
decisions to us the party and Leonid
Ilich Brev.
Defense Minister Dmitriov gives verbal
orders to prepare an invasion force.
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan will
be carried out by the newly created
Soviet 40th Army. Two motor rifle
divisions, an air assault regiment. All
in all, about 52,000 men in the initial
force. Additionally, in operation by Kal
79, one airborne division plus one
airborne regiment will directly airlift
into Kabell and Bagram airfields, then
seize key buildings in and around the
Afghan capital. Military transports will
land 7,700 men, 894 vehicles, and 1,62
tons of ammunition in the first wave. A
further 2,000 men are already present in
Kabell and Bagram from earlier
deployments. The Red Army incursion is
meant as a show of force for 6 months,
and the new Afghan government is to do
most of the fighting. Soviet ambassador
Fikriat Tabv tells Amin on December 22nd
that the USSR will officially send
troops within days. News which Amin
welcomes as he's requested them four
times already. Amin is confident.
Comrade Stalin showed us how to build
socialism in a backward country. It's
painful to begin with, but afterwards
everything turns out just fine.
The Soviet force will enter Afghanistan
from the northwest and northeast and
advance along the ring road connecting
the main cities and which had been built
by the US and USSR years before. On
December 25th, the first Soviet troops
cross the border. One pinser secures
Mazar Isharif Kundus and continues
towards Cabo. Helicopters escort the
ground troops and drop advanced guards
to secure the crucial Salang Pass
tunnel. The other Soviet group sets out
on December 27th via Herat Shindan and
then to Kandahar. Simultaneously, the
airborne forces secure key buildings
across Kabell. But that's not all that
happens in Kabell that day. For weeks,
Soviet special forces have assembled in
Kabell, preparing to eliminate Amin. The
invasion will be portrayed as friendly
assistance, but nothing could be left to
chance. GRU Colonel Vasili Kalesnik is
in charge of the plan. Soviet military
intelligence's Muslim battalion flew
into Kabell on December 10th, supposedly
to protect Ami. There are also two KGB
teams, Zenit and Grom, and a company of
air assault troops. All in all, about
560 men. Amin and Taraki had suggested
the creation of the Muslim battalion to
allow Soviet troops to keep a lower
profile. It consists of soldiers from
Soviet Central Asian republics to appear
more familiar to locals and they wear
Afghan uniforms to blend in with Afghan
government troops. The initial plan has
to be redrawn after Amin moves to the
Tajg palace on December 16th. Although
since the Soviets are providing part of
his security, they get detailed plans of
the arrangements at the palace. Still,
the Tajb is a tough nut to crack. It's
on a hill, the surrounding area is
mined, and there are Afghan army
barracks and three dugin T-54 tanks
nearby. More Afghan troops with tanks
and anti-aircraft guns are in the
vicinity as well, bringing the total to
2,500 men defending the palace.
The Soviet attack force is split into 12
groups. BG1 will neutralize the implaced
tanks. BG2 is the main assault force.
With six BMPPS, they'll storm the palace
via the main road and take out guard
posts along the way. BG3 will outflank
the palace from the west. The other
groups will pin down Afghan troops, take
out Afghan anti-aircraft guns, and
provide fire support, including with
four ZSU234
Shilka self-propelled radar guided
anti-aircraft weapons and grenade
launchers. Command recovery and medical
teams are also nearby.
Operation Storm 333 begins on December
27th, and Amin still believes the
Soviets are on his side.
The Soviet divisions are already on the
way here. Paratroopers have landed in
Cabell. All is going well. I'm
constantly on the telephone
communicating with Comrade Gromiko and
we are discussing the best way to inform
the world about this Soviet military
assistance.
Just after Amin gives this speech, the
KGB tries to kill him with poisoned
cola, but he survives. Meanwhile, Soviet
teams launched sabotage operations
across the city to confuse Afghan
forces, including Soviet advisers
removing batteries from tanks or KGB
agents, crippling the telephone network.
Still, more Soviet units quickly take
important government and infrastructure
buildings like a prison, the post
office, DRA general staff building, the
TV and radio center, secret police
headquarters, and defense and interior
ministries. Colonel Yfghini Cherishov
records his impressions in his diary.
The movement of the paratroopers convoy
through the city could be tracked by the
sound of gunfire. As our units
approached the targets, gunfire erupted
and tracer rounds stre across the sky.
The Afghan guards were ready to defend
themselves.
At the palace, Kalesnik's force runs
into trouble. Although Amin believes at
first the Soviets are on his side,
Afghan forces are on guard after the
failed cola poisoning. BG1 engages, but
the shooting causes DRRA forces to raise
a general alert at 7:15 p.m. So,
Kalesnik orders a general assault with
fire support. DRA troops knock out
several Soviet BMPs of BG2. So, the Red
Army troops continue on foot and reach
the palace at 7:40. They storm the lower
floor and heavy fighting ensues.
Meanwhile, BG3 takes losses approaching
the other side of the palace, but
eventually reaches the palace under the
cover of the Shilkas. Other groups
successfully pin down Afghan units
outside the palace, and two groups help
the stalled BG1 to eliminate the dugin
tanks.
Colonel VG Salen remembers the attack.
First, KGB special units stormed the
palace. Then some Spetsnaz troops
followed. In an attempt to scare the
defenders, or perhaps out of fear, the
attackers shouted loudly, mostly
profanities. The fighting inside the
palace immediately became fierce and
uncompromising. If no one came from a
room with their hands raised, the doors
were broken down. Grenades were thrown
in. Then the attackers opened fire with
automatic weapons indiscriminately.
BG2 and three make it upstairs in the
palace, but they're down to 50 men. They
kill most of Amin's bodyguards and find
and kill Amin and his two sons. The
whole operation lasts 43 minutes. At
least nine Soviet troops are killed,
though some claim up to 100, and 69 are
badly wounded, while around 200 Afghans
are killed and hundreds taken prisoner.
Soviet military brass decorates nearly
all Storm 333 participants, including
Kalesnik, who's made a hero of the
Soviet Union. Storm 333 also leaves a
legacy as a daring and successful
special operation. Years later, some in
Russia will look at it as a bright spot
in the Afghan war, and it becomes a
staple of the Russian Airborne Officer
Academy, including the hybrid
combination with sabotage,
disinformation, and subversion. The day
after the raid on December 28th, Carmel
arrives in Kabell and promises the
public he'll stop the torture and
executions and unite the PDPA. Not
included in the pre-recorded broadcast
message is the ongoing execution of
Amin's closest followers. Many Afghans
don't believe Cardinal's public
reassurances and 430,000
flee to Pakistan by January 1980.
Within 72 hours, the USSR has installed
a new Afghan leader, even though the
invasion and regime change plans were
hatched mere weeks before. More than 40
years later, historians still debate why
exactly the Soviets decided to invade.
Operation Bal 79 was a gamble given
Afghanistan's unstable history and the
fact that the USSR was not militarily,
economically, or politically prepared to
nation build. The Soviets lacked local
expertise and language skills, and it's
still unclear exactly how much influence
they really had on the PDPA after the
invasion. Soviet leaders knew it would
damage their projected image as allies
of anti-colonial movements as well. At a
March meeting, foreign minister Andre
Gromiko made the danger clear.
Who will the Soviet army fight against?
Against the Afghan people first and
foremost. And they'll have to be fired
on. Everything that we created in recent
years in terms of dant, arms control and
many other things, all of that will be
thrown back. Of course, it will be a
good present for China. All the
non-aligned countries will be against
us.
And yet, the Soviets had reasons to be
confident. They had successfully
intervened in Czechoslovakia in 1968, in
Ethiopia from 1974, and in Angola from
1975.
In Angola, local communists even
functioned as a vanguard party that led
the revolution themselves. Moscow hoped
the PDPA would play a similar role in
Afghanistan. Even before the sour
revolution, Moscow sent thousands of
civilian advisers, including communist
youth league members to work with young
Afghans. Some historians point to the
potential influence of Soviet officials
like Ambassador to Afghanistan Alexander
Puzzanov and KGB Lieutenant General
Baris Ivanov who was long stationed in
the country. Both strongly argued for
intervention and Puzzanov was a close
friend of Taraki. They and others close
to him may have influenced Andropov who
was initially skeptical of an invasion
but available sources are incomplete.
What is clear is that Amin's seizure of
power tipped the balance. Moscow
concluded he was not loyal to the Soviet
Union and planned to shift away from the
USSR. In the end, the Cold War fear of
losing Afghanistan, even indirectly to
US influence, outweighed the risks.
Back in December 1979, just as GMO
fears, Moscow's role of the dice in
Afghanistan provokes a flurry of
international reactions that spell
trouble. The US and UK worry about
Soviet control in Afghanistan, and
President Jimmy Carter announces global
Soviet expansionism must be stopped.
>> The Soviet Union is going to have to
answer some basic questions.
Will it help promote a more stable
international environment
in which its own legitimate peaceful
concerns can be pursued?
or will it continue to expand its
military power far beyond its genuine
security needs and use that power for
colonial conquest.
The Soviet Union must realize that its
decision to use military force in
Afghanistan will be costly to every
political and economic relationship it
values.
Some in the Carter administration hope
the conflict might turn into a Soviet
Vietnam. National Security Advisers
Bignv Jinsky though worries the
Mujahedin are too weak and disorganized
and lack foreign support unlike North
Vietnam. He also thinks the Soviets will
act more decisively than the US did in
Vietnam. The US still decides to
increase financial and military support
for the mujahedin and encourages the
Chinese and Muslim countries to help
them as well. But the biggest change is
US policy towards Pakistan.
We must both reassure Pakistan and
encourage it to help the rebels. This
will require a review of our policy
toward Pakistan. More guarantees to it,
more arms aid, and alas, a decision that
our security policy towards Pakistan
cannot be dictated by our
non-prololiferation policy.
From now on, the US will be much closer
to Pakistan and look the other way on
nuclear weapons and questions of
democracy. Pakistan-based CIA agent
Howard Hart argues that the existing
support for the Mujahadin should be
expanded to include weapons. The
Pakistanis also strengthened cooperation
with Saudi Arabia. Head of Saudi
intelligence Turkey al- Faizal sees
Pakistan as the best option to keep the
Soviets out of the Middle East and soon
provides the ISI with funds matching US
contributions.
The United Nations General Assembly
condemns the Soviet invasion as many
voting member states with a colonial
past are uncomfortable with a great
power invading a country that claimed to
be non-aligned and anti-imperial.
Secretary General Ku Valdheim,
ironically a former Nazi from Austria,
tries to negotiate a settlement, but the
USSR, the new Afghan government, and
neighbors Pakistan and revolutionary
Iran are not interested. There will be
no quick and easy peace in Afghanistan.
Soviet troops have marched into what
will become a longer, costlier, and
bloodier war than any have imagined. We
hope you enjoyed this breakdown of the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. We're
going to cover the entire history of the
Soviet Afghan war and the aftermath
until the US invasion in 2001 in a
multi-part series. Such ambitious
multi-part projects are only possible
because of your ongoing support on
Patreon. If you go to
patreon.com/realtimehistory,
you can contribute a monthly or annual
amount and make realtime history
documentaries better for everyone. Your
support means we can spend more time and
money on research, footage, map
animations, and produce more detailed
documentaries.
We want to thank Sophia Shirova for her
support with this documentary. If you
want to learn more about the Vietnam
War, check out our almost 3-hour long
documentary on that. As usual, you can
find all the sources for this video in
the description below. I'm Jesse
Alexander and this is a production of
Realtime History, the only history
channel that won't drink KGB cola.